---
title:      "Previous research: Host-parasite interactions; cellular immune responses of pulmonate snails to infection by trematodes"
permalink:  /research/host-parasite-interaction/
menu:       /research/
type:       project
project_id: dissertation_cand
order:      6
excerpt:    ' 
  The focus of my Candidate of Science dissertation was cellular immune response of Biomphalaria
snails to infection by Echinostoma trematodes. Biomphalaria snails are freshwater pulmonate snails,
native to Caribbean and South America. In my research, I used two species, B. glabrata and B.
pfeifferi. Biomphalaria glabrata has been a primary model species for investigating snail defense
mechanisms because it is an intermediate host for the human blood fluke, Schistosoma mansoni, a
dangerous parasite that infects millions of people worldwide and causes the disease that '
---


**Dissertation. Candidate of Science:** <a href="{{ 'assets/content/misc/AlinaAvanesyan_dissertation_2002.pdf' | relative_url }}">The effect of defense responses of snails on
development of trematode partenitae (with a focus on the family Echinostomatidae)</a> (Alina
Avanesyan, 2002; Herzen State University, St. Petersburg, Russia)

**Advisor:** Dr. Gennady Ataev, Professor, Department Chair, Department of Zoology, Herzen State
University, St. Petersburg, Russia

The focus of my Candidate of Science dissertation was cellular immune response of Biomphalaria
snails to infection by Echinostoma trematodes. Biomphalaria snails are freshwater pulmonate snails,
native to Caribbean and South America. In my research, I used two species, B. glabrata and B.
pfeifferi. Biomphalaria glabrata has been a primary model species for investigating snail defense
mechanisms because it is an intermediate host for the human blood fluke, Schistosoma mansoni, a
dangerous parasite that infects millions of people worldwide and causes the disease that is called
schistosomiasis. For my research, I used other, less dangerous, but still wide-spread trematodes –
Echinostoma caproni and E. paraensei, which are intestinal parasites of mammals and birds and which
also undergo their larvae development in Biomphalaria snails. In previous studies on B. glabrata,
two strains of this species have been identified: a strain which exhibits resistance to infection by
E. caproni (my primary study species) and a strain which is susceptible to infection by this
trematode. In my research, I was interested in exploring the role of hemocytes in snail defense
mechanisms and how a hemocytic response might differ between resistant and susceptible snails.

I worked under the direction of <a href="https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Gennady_Ataev">Dr.
Gennady Ataev</a> in the <a
href="https://www.herzen.spb.ru/main/structure/fukultets/bio/1384520856/1387808264/">Laboratory of
Experimental Zoology</a> at the <a
href="https://sites.google.com/a/zooherzen.org/www/home">Department of Zoology</a> at <a
href="https://www.herzen.spb.ru/en/">Herzen State University</a>. Snail defense mechanisms to
infection by trematodes was the main focus of the lab research. For my dissertation project, my
primary objectives were (1) to identify and characterize the hematopoietic tissue in B. glabrata
snails, (2) to compare the structure, mitotic activity of the hematopoietic tissue, as well as
encapsulation of parasites by hemocytes in resistant and susceptible strains (both qualitatively and
quantitatively), and (3) to perform morphological analysis of Echinostoma larvae (sporocyst)
development in B.  glabrata snails.

## Location and morphology of the hematopoietic tissue

By the time I started this project, the location of the hematopoietic tissue in invertebrates, and
particularly in snails, was poorly understood. We found that the hematopoietic tissue in
Biomphalaria snails (so called amebocyte-producing organ, or APO) is located between the pericardium
and the mantle epithelium. APO is composed of numerous cellular aggregations; they are located near
the external surface of the pericardium and lacunas of the blood system. The number of cell
aggregations In non-infected snails did not exceed 5; the cross-sectional area of each aggregation
ranged from 25-50 µm. The aggregations varied from round, oval, and elongated to amoeboid shape, and
comprised of clustered cells with the basophilic cytoplasm and oval-shaped nuclei. 

<figure>
  <div class="row">
    <div class="col-12 col-sm">
      <figure class="figure mb-0">
        <img class="figure-img img-fluid" 
          src="{{ '/assets/content/projects/dissertation_cand/apo_a.jpg' | relative_url }}" alt="">
      </figure>
    </div>
    <div class="col-12 col-sm">
      <figure class="figure mb-0">
        <img class="figure-img img-fluid" 
          src="{{ '/assets/content/projects/dissertation_cand/apo_b.jpg' | relative_url }}" alt="">
      </figure>
    </div>
  </div>
  <div class="row">
    <div class="col-12 col-sm">
      <figure class="figure mb-0">
        <img class="figure-img img-fluid" 
          src="{{ '/assets/content/projects/dissertation_cand/apo_c.jpg' | relative_url }}" alt="">
      </figure>
    </div>
    <div class="col-12 col-sm">
      <figure class="figure mb-0">
        <img class="figure-img img-fluid" 
          src="{{ '/assets/content/projects/dissertation_cand/apo_d.jpg' | relative_url }}" alt="">
      </figure>
    </div>
  </div>
  <figcaption class="figure-caption">Histological sections of the amoebocyte-producing organ (APO) in resistant
  Biomphalaria glabrata snails. (A) APO (black arrows) in non-infected snails; (mc) mantle cavity;
  (pc) pericardial cavity. (B) APO with divided cells (dc) (white arrows) after 3 days post
  infection (PI). (C) APO after 3 days PI. (D) APO after 5 days PI.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

## Hematopoietic activity in resistant and susceptible snails

To further explore defense mechanisms B. glabrata snails, we performed a comparative histological
analysis of the structure and mitotic activity of the hematopoietic tissue, as well as migration of
hemocytes from the APO to the location of E. caproni sporocyst in resistant and susceptible snails.
Snails were dissected in certain time intervals (from 1h to 30d post infection); tissues were then
fixed and embedded in paraffin. Sections (5 µm thick) were prepared using a microtome, stained
(using Erlich’s hematoxylin-eosin), and screened under the microscope. We found that there was a
greater cellular immune response in resistant snails compared to that in susceptible snails – i.e.
increased cell proliferation in the APO, increased migration of hemocytes to the location of the
sporocyst, and successful encapsulation of the sporocyst. In susceptible snails, however, even
though we also observed increased cell proliferation in the APO and aggregations of hemocytes near
the sporocyst, this cellular response had never resulted in the encapsulation of the parasite, and
the sporocyst continued its development and migration to the snail heart area.

<figure class="figure">
  <img class="border-0 figure-img img-fluid"
       src="{{ '/assets/content/projects/dissertation_cand/capsules.jpg' | relative_url }}" alt="">
  <figcaption class="figure-caption text-left">Encapsulation of Echinostoma caproni mother
    sporocysts developing in resistant Biomphalaria glabrata snails (from 3 to 7 days post infection).
    The sporocysts demonstrate different level of degradation, and sporocysts remains only are
    observed after 7 days post infection (the last picture).
  </figcaption>
</figure>

<figure class="figure">
  <img class="border-0 figure-img img-fluid"
       src="{{ '/assets/content/projects/dissertation_cand/cells2.jpg' | relative_url }}" alt="">
  <figcaption class="figure-caption text-left">Activity of the amoebocyte-producing organ (APO)
     during infection by Echinostoma caproni in resistant (A) and susceptible (B) Biomphalaria
     glabrata snails. 
  </figcaption>
</figure>

## Germinal cell lineage in Echinostoma miracidia

As part of my dissertation, I explored development of Echinostoma trematodes in Biomphalaria snails.
I focused on the germinal elements of Echinostoma miracidia and performed comparative morphological
analysis of germinal cells development in E. caproni and E. paraensei. Germinal material in
Echinostoma miracidia is represented by germinal cells (primary and/or secondary) and
undifferentiated cells. The germinal cells are quite large (cross-sectional area is 27.0 ± 0.8 µm2),
with a large bubble-shaped nucleus and a basophilic cytoplasm. We found that miracidia of E.
paraensei already contained embryos, and their sporocysts released mother rediae a few days earlier
than sporocysts of E. caproni. Overall, our analysis of germinal cells development provided
additional support to previous findings that species E. caproni and E. paraensei distinct species.

<figure class="mx-auto w-75">
  <img class="border-0 figure-img img-fluid"
       src="{{ '/assets/content/projects/dissertation_cand/miracidia.jpg' | relative_url }}" alt="">
  <figcaption class="figure-caption text-left">Longitudinal sections of miracidia of Echinostoma caproni (A) and Echinostoma paraensei (B,C) (e,
    embryo of mother redia; gc, germinal cells; n, neural mass; sc, secretory cells; uc,
    undifferentiated cells). Large arrow indicates miracidium without a redial embryo. Scale bar, 10 pm.
  </figcaption>
</figure>




Additionally, I explored the cellular composition and activity of the hematopoietic tissue in B.
pfeifferi, as well as several local gastropods, such as Planorbis, Planorabarius, and Succinea
snails, and collected data on the temperature effect on the trematode development in their
intermediate hosts.


---
## Other projects
---

## Genetic variation in littoral snail populations

I worked on this project while I was a part-time researcher at the <a
href="http://www.cytspb.rssi.ru/">Institute of Cytology, RAS</a> in St.  Petersburg, Russia. I
worked at the Laboratory of Cell Biology in Culture under the direction of <a
href="https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Natalia_Mikhailova">Dr.  Natalia Mikhailova</a>. The
project was on molecular phylogeny and ecological adaptations of the Cerastoderma and the Littorina
snails collected in the intertidal zone of North-European region. We have recently published our
paper on the evidence of hybridization between two species of littoral snails in the intertidal
sites of the Barents Sea, using RAPD nuclear marker.

<div class="ic4f-pubs-project">
{% show_pubs dissertation_cand %}
</div>
