---
title:      About Me
permalink:  /about/
excerpt:    "
  I am a biology researcher. I have worked primarily on species interactions (host-parasite and
  plant-insect interactions), population genetics, and phylogenetics. In my research, I have
  integrated molecular biology approaches, field and laboratory experiments, as well as microscopy and
  histological techniques."
---

I am a biology researcher. I have worked primarily on species interactions (host-parasite and
plant-insect interactions), population genetics, and phylogenetics. In my research, I have
integrated molecular biology approaches, field and laboratory experiments, as well as microscopy and
histological techniques.  <!--more--> I earned my Diploma and, later, my Candidate of Science degree
in Biological Sciences at [Herzen State University](https://www.herzen.spb.ru/en/About_University)
in St. Petersburg, Russia. I worked under the direction of [Dr. Gennady
Ataev](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Gennady_Ataev) in the [Laboratory of Experimental
Zoology](https://www.herzen.spb.ru/main/structure/fukultets/bio/1384520856/1387808264/) at the
[Department of Zoology](https://sites.google.com/a/zooherzen.org/www/home). My dissertation was on
cellular immune responses of pulmonate snails to infection by trematodes. Using Biomphalaria
glabrata snails and Echinostoma caproni trematode as a model, I explored development of Echinostoma
larvae (sporocysts) in B. glabrata snails, and compared hemocytic response to parasitic infection in
B.  glabrata resistant and susceptible strains. I was able to identify and characterize the
hematopoietic tissue in B. glabrata snails; I also found that even though in both B. glabrata
strains the infection caused increased cell proliferation in the hematopoietic tissue and migration
of hemocytes to the location of the sporocyst, such cellular responses were stronger in resistant
snails, and the encapsulation of the parasite occurred in resistant snails only.

After completing my degree in 2002 I joined the faculty at Herzen State University. As faculty, I
taught a variety of lectures and laboratories, and worked with my undergraduate students on their
research. In 2008, I spent a semester as a visiting research scholar at the Biology Department at
the University of Northern Iowa, where I received training in molecular biology techniques and
worked on phylogeography and genetic variation in Uca crab populations. The following academic year
(2008/09), while still at Herzen, I became a part-time researcher at The Institute of Cytology in
St. Petersburg, where I continued my training in molecular biology and worked on genetic
hybridization of littoral snails at the Laboratory of Cell Biology in Culture under the direction of
Dr. Natalia Mikhailova.

I continued my education as a doctoral student at the Department of Biological Sciences at the
University of Cincinnati. My research areas included phylogenetic relationships of forensically
important flies, plant-insect interactions (which became the focus of my dissertation), as well as
aspects of plant population genetics.

I earned my Ph.D. in Biological Sciences in 2014, under the direction of Dr. Theresa Culley. In my
dissertation, I focused on interactions between native and exotic grasses and generalist insect
herbivores. I was interested in the potential impact of generalist insects on the successful spread
of exotic plants. Using a grasses-grasshoppers model, I combined behavioral and molecular approaches
to explore tolerant and resistant responses of native and exotic grasses to herbivory by Melanoplus
grasshoppers, as well as grasshopper feeding preferences on these plants. Through all of my
experiments, I found strong preference of grasshoppers for exotic plants, which was in contrast to
previous studies and suggested that grasshoppers might provide potential resistance to establishment
of exotic plants in the introduced range.

In 2016, I did postdoctoral work at the Department of Entomology at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison, focusing on biology and distribution of the invasive spotted wing drosophila,
Drosophila suzukii, in raspberry. My research included exploring optimal attractants for D. suzukii,
developing a protocol for determining a female’s mating status by isolating spermathecae, and
analyzing temperature and humidity effect on seasonal phenology of D. suzukii.

During 2016/2017 academic year I was a Genetics Instructor at Grand View University where I taught
upper-level Genetics and Molecular Biology laboratory courses for biotechnology majors. I trained my
students in a variety of molecular techniques, including DNA extraction and PCR amplification,
cloning, restriction mapping, and sequence analysis.

Outside my research and teaching I enjoy spending time with <a href="http://sergey.cs.uni.edu">my
husband</a> and our little daughter. We enjoy the outdoors whenever we get a chance – hiking,
biking, skiing, and simply exploring new places! And if the weather isn’t cooperating, you will find
me exploring the unpredictable worlds of Neil Gaiman, George Martin, or Douglas Adams…

<figure>
<img
    class="ic4f-mtrig ic4f-zoomin w-40 d-block mx-auto"
    src="{{ '/assets/content/misc/we.jpg' | relative_url }}" 
    alt="..." >
  <figcaption class="d-none">Sergey, Alina, and Alice</figcaption>
</figure>
